---
title: 3GPPP Access Traffic Steering, Switching, and Splitting (ATSSS) Overview for IETF Participants
abbrev: QUIC ATSSS
docname: draft-bonaventure-quic-atsss-overview-00
date: 2020-05-15
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: transport
workgroup: QUIC Working Group
keyword: Internet-Draft

coding: us-ascii
stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
  ins: M. Boucadair
  name: Mohamed Boucadair
  organization: Orange
  street: Clos Courtel
  city: Rennes
  code: 35000
  country: France
  email: mohamed.boucadair@orange.com
 -
  ins: O. Bonaventure
  name: Olivier Bonaventure
  organization: UCLouvain
  email: Olivier.Bonaventure@uclouvain.be
 -
  ins: M. Piraux
  name: Maxime Piraux
  organization: UCLouvain
  email: Maxime.Piraux@uclouvain.be
 -
  ins: Q. De Coninck
  name: Quentin De Coninck
  organization: UCLouvain
  email: quentin.deconinck@uclouvain.be
 -
  ins: S. Dawkins
  name: Spencer Dawkins
  organization: Tencent America
  email: spencerdawkins.ietf@gmail.com
 -
  ins: M. Amend
  name: Markus Amend
  organization: Deutsche Telekom
  email: markus.amend@telekom.de
 -
  ins: Q. An
  name: Qing An
  organization: Alibaba Group
  email: anqing.aq@alibaba-inc.com
 -
  ins: N. Keukeleire
  name: Nicolas Keukeleire
  organization: Tessares
  email: nicolas.keukeleire@tessares.net
 -
  ins: S. Seo
  name: SungHoon Seo
  organization: Korea Telecom
  email: sh.seo@kt.com

normative:
  TS23501:
    author:
      - ins: 3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project)
    title: Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects; System Architecture for the 5G System; Stage 2 (Release 16)
    date: 2019
    target: https://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/23_series/23.501/
informative:
  atsssliaison:
    author:
      - ins: 3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project)
    title: LS on need for Multi-Path QUIC for ATSSS
    date: Apr 2020
    target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/liaison/1678/
  I-D.ietf-quic-transport:
  I-D.deconinck-quic-multipath:
  I-D.amend-tsvwg-multipath-dccp:
  I-D.ietf-tcpm-converters:
  I-D.ietf-quic-datagram:
  I-D.schinazi-masque-protocol:
  I-D.schinazi-masque-connect-udp:
  I-D.piraux-quic-tunnel:
  I-D.piraux-quic-tunnel-tcp:
  I-D.boucadair-mptcp-plain-mode:
  I-D.bonaventure-iccrg-schedulers:
  RFC5533:
  RFC6275:
  RFC5213:
  RFC6459:
  RFC6824:
  RFC8041:
  IETFJ16:
    author:
      - ins: O. Bonaventure
      - ins: S. Seo
    title: Multipath TCP Deployment
    seriesinfo: IETF Journal, Fall 2016
    date: 2016
    target: https://www.ietfjournal.org/multipath-tcp-deployments/
  MPQUIC-Conext:
    author:
      - ins: Q. De Coninck
      - ins: O. Bonaventure
    title: Multipath QUIC - Design and evaluation 
    seriesinfo: Proceedings of the 13th international conference on emerging networking experiments and technologies 2017 Nov 28 (pp. 160-166).
    date: 2017
    target: https://multipath-quic.org/
  QUIC-Deployment:
    author:
      - ins: M. Kuehlewind
    title: Some updates on QUIC deployment numbers
    date: 2019
    target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/106/materials/slides-106-maprg-quic-deployment-update-00
  Hybrid:
    author:
      - ins: N. Keukeleire
      - ins: B. Hesmans
      - ins: O. Bonaventure
    title: Increasing broadband reach with Hybrid Access Networks
    seriesinfo: IEEE Communications and Standards Magazine, Vol. 4, Issue 1
    date: March 2020
    target: https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOMSTD.001.1900036
  MPTester:
    author:
      - ins: Q. De Coninck
      - ins: O. Bonaventure
    title: MultipathTester - Comparing MPTCP and MPQUIC in Mobile Environments. In 2019 Network Traffic Measurement and Analysis Conference (TMA) 
    date: 2019
    target: https://multipath-quic.org/multipathtester/2019/06/18/mnm-paper.html
  TR-348:
    author:
      - ins: Broadband Forum
    title: Hybrid Access Broadband Network Architecture
    date: 2016
    target: https://www.broadband-forum.org/download/TR-348.pdf
    
--- abstract

This document briefly presents the Access Traffic Steering, Switching, and Splitting (ATSSS) service being specified within the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP). The ATSSS service provides network support for multihomed devices to select a path for transmission (steer), move traffic from one path to another (switch), or use multiple paths simultaneously (split). TS 23.501 specifies an ATSSS architecture for TCP traffic. 

This document presents a snap-shot of the ongoing discussion in the 3GPP to enable ATSSS for non-TCP traffic, based on the use of QUIC, and assesses to what extent IETF specifications can be used to meet the ATSSS design goals; gaps (if any) will be documented.


--- middle

# Introduction {#intro}

The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) has described the Access Traffic Steering, Switching, and Splitting (ATSSS) service, used to carry TCP traffic over multiple available paths, in their Release 16 {{TS23501}}. In Release 16, ATSSS only supports TCP traffic and relies upon two IETF protocols: MPTCP {{RFC6824}} and Convert Protocol {{I-D.ietf-tcpm-converters}}.

As part of preparation for Release 17 studies, 3GPP has expressed an interest in other IETF protocols and protocol extensions that would enable ATSSS service of traffic not supported by the Convert Protocol nor based on the use of MPTCP. To that aim, 
3GPP has contacted the IETF through a formal liaison {{atsssliaison}}, letting the IETF know about this interest. An excerpt of the liaison document is provided below: 

"The work on the study has not yet started in 3GPP, and there are thus no agreed conclusions. The goal is to enable steering, switching and splitting of traffic (primarily UDP) across multiple accesses, including latency sensitive and real time traffic. Therefore 3GPP is interested to receive regular feedback on progress and prioritization on the multipath extensions to QUIC."

Because "3GPP SA kindly requests IETF to take the above information into account when discussing future work in prioritizing the multipath work for QUIC", but the complete specification of ATSSS in the relevant 3GPP architecture documents reflects the complexity of 3GPP networks, the authors of this document worked to provide a high level overview of the parts of ATSSS that would be impacted by IETF protocol design, in terminology that is more familiar to IETF participants. 

## Notes for Readers

This document is an informational Internet-Draft from individuals, and does not carry any special status within the IETF.

This document abstracts considerable architectural detail that is available in 3GPP specifications. The goal is to make this overview more accessible for IETF readers who are not familiar with 3GPP 5G architecture. 

This document makes references to Internet-Drafts that are not as mature as the core QUIC Internet-Drafts, and in some cases, have not been adapted as Working Group drafts yet, although all are within existing and proposed IETF working group charters. The goal is to give 3GPP readers the most up-to-date understanding of what is possible.

# Introduction to Access Traffic Steering, Switching, and Splitting (ATSSS) {#intro2atsss}

Mobile devices such as laptops, smartphones, tablets support multiple network
interfaces that may attach to different networks. Over the years, various techniques
have been proposed to support such multi-interfaced devices (e.g., {{RFC5533}},{{RFC6275}},{{RFC5213}}, or {{RFC6824}}). 

Users of these devices
have different expectations concerning the utilization of available network connectivity (and thus their different
network interfaces). For simplicity, we consider a smartphone that
is equipped with a Wireless LAN (WLAN) interface and a cellular interface, but the discussion
below can be generalized to any network interface that supports IP.

Some users of these smartphones want to offload a maximum of their traffic onto the WLAN while expecting seamless handovers. For example, when
they move out of the reach of their home WLAN, they expect that the established flows (e.g., TCP connections, UDP flows)
will continue over the cellular interface without any interruption (called, session continuity). As the devices is assigned different IP addresses over
WLAN and the cellular networks, this seamless
handover requires some specific assistance from the network. The current
utilization of Multipath TCP on Apple smartphones is an example of this use
case {{IETFJ16}}.

Some users want to load balance their flows over the
different available networks, e.g., by sending a delay-sensitive flow over cellular and
a long download over the WLAN network. Several smartphones enable applications
to indicate their preferences when using available networks.
This steering policy can be managed by the smartphone, but flows need to continue
after a handover. 

Other users may want to combine the resources provided by the cellular and the WLAN networks
to improve the up and download throughput performance of individual flows. 
The GiGA LTE and GiGA 5G services deployed using Multipath TCP in South Korea are an example of this use case {{IETFJ16}}.

To support these different use cases in 5G networks, 3GPP is working on the
Access Traffic Steering, Switching and Splitting (ATSSS) service {{TS23501}}. This work is
further adopted by BBF to provide similar capabilities to residential gateways
equipped with multiple access interfaces, in the continuity of the Hybrid Access Networks {{TR-348}}.
In this document, we abstract many of the technical details of future 5G networks 
to explain the capabilities ATSSS needs, which may impact decisions about future work on IETF protocols.

# Contribution and Discussion Venues for this draft. 

(Note to RFC Editor - if this document ever reaches you, please remove this section)

This document is under development in the Github repository at https://github.com/obonaventure/draft-quic-atsss-reqs.  Readers are invited to open issues and send pull requests with contributed text for this document.

Substantial discussion of this document should take place on the QUIC working group mailing list (quic@ietf.org). Subscription and archive details are at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/quic.

# Conventions, Terminology, and Definitions

This document makes use of 3GPP specific terms defined in {{RFC6459}}, mainly the following ones: 

- Packet Data Network (PDN): is a packet-based network that
      either belongs to the operator or is external (such as
      the Internet or a corporate intranet).  The user eventually
      accesses services in one or more PDNs.  The operator's packet core
      networks are separated from packet data networks either by User Plane Functions (UPFs).

- UE (User Equipment): refers to the devices that are hosts with the
      ability to obtain Internet connectivity via a 3GPP network.
     
- User Plane: refers to data traffic and the required sessions for
      the data traffic.  In practice, IP is the only data traffic
      protocol used in the user plane.
      
Also, the document uses the following additional terms: 

- Protocol Data Unit (PDU) Session: An association between the UE and the Data Network (DN) to carry the user data/traffic. 

- Multi-access PDU (MA-PDU) Session: A PDU session that has simultaneously user plane resources assigned on 3GPP and non-3GPP access networks.
     
- User Plane Function (UPF): A logical function in the 5G core network that provides the interconnect point between the mobile infrastructure and the Data Network (DN) and anchor point for Protocol Data Unit (PDU) Sessions to enable mobility.

- Data Network Name (DNN): is a Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) and resolves to a set of gateways in an operator's network. DNN is used for the selection of the UPF(s) for a PDU Session.

# High level Overview {#overview}

The 5G Core (5GC) supports a service that provides exchange of data between a User Equipment (UE) and a data network (referred to as Packet Data Network (PDN)) identified by a Data Network Name (DNN). This connectivity service, called PDU Connectivity Service, is realized via 'PDU Sessions' that are established upon request from the UE when the UE first connects to that network. The type of PDU Session can be IPv4, IPv6, IPv4v6, Ethernet or Unstructured.

It is out of the scope of this document to provide a comprehensive overview of 5G System (5GS) architecture. In particular, this document does not describe how PDU Sessions are established, and thus how IP addresses/prefixes are assigned to requesting User Equipment (UEs). 

An UE can be provided a multi-access PDU Connectivity Service. That is, an UE can exchange data with a PDN by using a "3GPP access network" and a "non-3GPP access network". This is realized by use of the ATSSS service that is provided in the 5G core network usually collocated with the User Plane Function (UPF) that manages the UE's PDU session.


## Reference Architecture {#ref-arch}


To understand the operation of the ATSSS service, it is useful to consider the
reference environment shown in {{fig-arch}}. An UE
is attached to two different access networks (Access Net A and Access Net B).
These two networks are potentially shared with other users and the available
bandwidth varies over time. These fluctuations in bandwidth are managed by
using congestion control schemes.

One of these access networks is managed by a 5G provider according to
the 3GPP specifications. The second network is potentially managed by
a different organization. It is important to note that in this second case, there
is an IPSec tunnel between the UE and a dedicated device in the 5G network
(not shown in {{fig-arch}}). A dedicated IP address is assigned by means of Internet Key Exchange version 2 (IKEv2) to the UE to access the 5GC via this second network. 

The UE interacts with a distant server
through a User Plane Function hosting the ATSSS functionality. This UPF is called hereafter ATSSS UPF.
The ATSSS UPF enables the UE to use a transport protocol that supports
the different access networks even if the server does not support it (i.e., is not multipath-capable
at transport layer).

The 5G control plane provides the UE and the UPF with ATSSS rules as discussed in {{sec-rules}}.


~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  ........(ATSSS Rules From Network)..........
  .                                          .
  .            ------------                  .
  .           /            \                 .
  .  +-------| Access Net A |--+             .
  .  |        \   (3GPP)   /   |             .
  .  |         ------------    |             .
  .  |                         |             .
  .  |                         |             .
  .  |                 -------------         .
 +---+--+              /             \    +-----+        +------+
 |  UE  |             | 3GPP Core Net +---|ATSSS|-/.../--|Server|
 |      |              \             /    | UPF |        +------+
 +--+---+               -------------     +-----+
    |                          |                  
    |                          |
    |          ------------    |
    |         /            \   |
    +--------| Access Net B |--+
              \ (non 3GPP) /
               ------------
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #fig-arch title="Simplified Reference Architecture for ATSSS"}

## External IP Addresses Used by the ATSSS UPF

The ATSSS UPF translates the access network specific addresses into an address called Multi-Access (MA) IP address and vice versa. Such address is also directly assigned to the UE (that is, packets that are not eligible to the ATSSS service are sourced by the UE with that IP address).

Absent any coordination between the UE and the ATSSS UPF (e.g., assignment of port ranges), the same port number may be used simultaneously by the ATSSS UPF and the UE; which is problematic.

To avoid such issue, the ATSSS UPF may be configured with a pool of IP addresses that it can use in the Internet-facing interfaces instead of preserving the MA IP address assigned to the UE. How that pool is used is deployment- and implementation-specific.

## ATSSS Modes

3GPP defines the following procedures {{TS23501}} that are applicable between "3GPP access" and "non-3GPP access" networks:
 
- Access Traffic Steering: selection of an access network for a new data flow and the transfer of the traffic of that data flow over the selected access network. 
- Access Traffic Switching: migration of all packets of an ongoing data flow from one access network to another access network while ensuring session continuity. 
- Access Traffic Splitting: split of the packets of a data flow across multiple access networks.

Techniques to provide ATSSS are classified by the 3GPP into two flavors: (1) high-layer techniques which operate above the IP layer (e.g., MPTCP), and (2) low-layer techniques which operate below the IP layer. Only high-layer steering techniques are discussed in this document.

## ATSSS Rules {#sec-rules}

The 5G control plane provides the UE and the ATSSS UPF with rules that specify
which flows are eligible to the ATSSS service (i.e., by mapping them to a Multi-Access PDU Session). Once a Multi-Access PDU Session has been established, a set of ATSSS rules are then delivered to both the UE and the ATSSS UPF in order to enable unified treatment of the flows by both the UE and the ATSSS UPF within the Session.


The traffic that matches an ATSSS rule can be distributed among available access networks following one of these modes:

- “Active-Standby”: The traffic associated with the matching flow will be forwarded via a specific access (called 'active access') and switched to another access (called 'standby access') when the active access is unavailable. 
- “Smallest Delay”: The traffic associated with the matching flow will be forwarded via the access that presents the smallest RTT. To that aim, specific measurements are conducted by the UE and a dedicated function co-located with the ATSSS UPF. 
- “Load-Balancing”: The traffic associated with the matching flow will be distributed among available access networks following a distribution ratio (e.g., 30% via a first access, 70% via a second access).
- “Priority-based”: For this mode, accesses are assigned priority levels that indicate which access to be used first. Concretely, the traffic associated with the matching flow will be steered on the access with a high priority till congestion is detected, then the overflow will be forwarded over a low priority access. 

In order to provide the above-mentioned steering modes, the ATSSS service relies upon a dedicated protocol called Performance Measurement Function (PMF) protocol. This protocol is enabled between the UE and the UPF and is meant to provide RTT measurements and reporting access availability/unavailability by the UE to the UPF. PMF is not specific to a given ATSSS version. 

Furthermore, these modes of operations were designed assuming that multipath protocols
such as MPTCP {{RFC6824}} would be used over the different paths between
the UE and the ATSSS. The implementations of these protocols include two
types of mechanisms to control the utilization of the paths: (i) a
path manager and (ii) a packet scheduler {{RFC8041}}.
The path manager decides when a
new subflow needs to be established over a path while the packet scheduler
selects the subflow over which the next packet will be sent. A more detailed
description of several packet schedulers may be found in
{{I-D.bonaventure-iccrg-schedulers}}.

The "Active-Standby" mode can be implemented using a path manager that tries to
use the active access and switches to the standby one after a certain number
of retransmissions. This mode of operation is similar to the utilization of
Multipath TCP on iOS smartphones {{RFC8041}}.

The "Smallest Delay" mode can be implemented using a path manager that
establishes a subflow over both paths and a packet scheduler that measures
their RTTs and prefers the one having the lowest RTT.
These
path manager and scheduler are similar to the default packet
scheduler used by Multipath TCP on Linux {{RFC8041}}.
The "Load-Balancing" mode would use the same path manager with a weighted
round-robin scheduler.

The "Priority-based" mode can be implemented using a path manager that is
similar to the one used by the "Active-Standby" one, but which reacts faster
and a packet scheduler that prefers the high priority path. These
path manager and scheduler are similar to the ones used in
deployed Hybrid Access networks {{Hybrid}}.

## ATSSS Versions

We first describe in {{sec-ver1}} the ATSSS as specified in Release 16 (called hereafter, ATSSS version 1) that uses
Multipath TCP {{RFC6824}} and the Convert Protocol {{I-D.ietf-tcpm-converters}}. We then discuss in {{sec-ver2}} the data plane requirements for version 2 of the ATSSS specification that 3GPP plans for Release 17. More details about 3GPP releases can be found at: https://www.3gpp.org/specifications/Releases.

# ATSSS Version 1: Support for TCP {#sec-ver1}

For ATSSS with Multipath TCP functionality, a client with two interfaces connected to two disjoint access networks (in this case, Access Net A and Access Net B), uses MPTCP to reach an MPTCP proxy over either, or both, of the access networks. This allows the client to communicate with a server which does not terminate MPTCP connections.

During the attachment of an ATSSS-capable UE to the network, the UE retrieves the MPTCP proxy information: an IP address, a port number, and the type of the MPTCP proxy. In the current release, the mandatory MPTCP proxy type is the "Transport Converter" {{I-D.ietf-tcpm-converters}}.

Also, both the MPTCP Client and MPTCP proxy are configured with ATSSS rules from the network that govern how the multiple network paths between the MPTCP Client and MPTCP proxy are used. This relationship is shown using "." between the MPTCP Client and MPTCP Proxy. 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  ........(ATSSS Rules From Network)..........
  .                                          .
  .            ------------                  .
  .           /            \                 .
  .  +-------| Access Net A |--+             .
  .  |        \   (3GPP)   /   |             .
  .  |         ------------    |             .
  .  |                         |             .
  .  |                         |             .
  .  |                  -------------        .
 +---+--+              /             \    +-----+        +------+
 |MPTCP |             | 3GPP Core Net +---|MPTCP|-/.../--|Server|
 |Client|              \             /    |Proxy|        +------+
 +--+---+               -------------     +-----+
    |                          |
    |                          |
    |          ------------    |
    |         /            \   |
    +--------| Access Net B |--+
              \ (non 3GPP) /
               ------------
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #fig-mptcp-arch title="Simplified Reference Architecture for ATSSS with Multipath TCP"}


An ATSSS-capable UE can make use of the MPTCP functionality by establishing MPTCP-assisted connections via the MPTCP proxy relying upon the Convert Protocol {{I-D.ietf-tcpm-converters}}. The UE behaves as a “Client”, while the MPTCP proxy behaves as a Transport Converter {{I-D.ietf-tcpm-converters}}. 

The ATSSS-capable UE sends packets bound to connections matching an ATSSS rule to the provisioned Transport Converter and destination port number. Concretely, the UE initiates the MPTCP connection towards the Transport Converter and indicates the IP address and port number of the Server within the connection establishment packet (i.e., in the payload of the SYN sent to the Transport Converter).  Doing so enables the Transport Converter to immediately initiate a connection towards that Server, without experiencing an extra delay. The Transport Converter waits until the receipt of the confirmation that the Server agrees to establish the connection before confirming it to the Client.

A flow example of an MPTCP-proxied connection is show in {{fig-example}}. This example assumes that the Server is not MPTCP-aware. The instructions included in the matching ATSSS rule will be followed for the management of the MPTCP connection (including the selection of the access network to establish the first subflow). 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
          UE                   MPTCP Proxy               Server
          |                        |                        |
          |SYN, MPC [->Server:port]|         SYN, MPC       |
          |----------------------->|----------------------->|
          |<-----------------------|<-----------------------|
          |  SYN+ACK, MPC [...]    |        SYN+ACK         |
          |----------------------->|----------------------->|
          |        ACK, MPC        |          ACK           |
          |          ...           |           ...          |

Legend:
     []: Convert Protocol TLVs
    MPC: MP_CAPABLE option [RFC8684] 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #fig-example title="An Example of MPTCP-proxied Connection Matching an ATSSS Rule."}

This approach provides 0-RTT (Zero Round-Trip Time) conversion service since no extra delay is induced by the Convert protocol compared to connections that are not proxied. Also, the Convert Protocol does not require any encapsulation (no tunnels, whatsoever).

If the server supports MPTCP, the Convert Protocol provides an option for clients to "opt-out". In such case, an MPTCP connection is directly established between the client and the server. Given that few servers are MPTCP capable, relying on the ATSSS service is the only option for UEs to make use of available multiple paths simultaneously.

# ATSSS Version 2: Adding Non-TCP Support {#sec-ver2}

The MPTCP-based ATSSS approach discussed in the previous section is specific to TCP,
obviously. Therefore it does not support non-TCP traffic, such as
UDP, QUIC {{QUIC-Deployment}} or IPsec and Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) Virtual Private Network (VPN) services.
As the share of these protocols grows, mainly driven by QUIC deployment, and the seamless handover is particularly useful for real-time traffic (e.g., voice or video calls), a future ATSSS needs to extend beyond supporting TCP only.

Several proposals to carry non-TCP traffic were discussed, including
using TCP {{I-D.boucadair-mptcp-plain-mode}} or
defining multipath extensions to DCCP {{I-D.amend-tsvwg-multipath-dccp}}.
The work within 3GPP now focuses on using QUIC as the baseline for the second
version of ATSSS.

## QUIC and Multihoming


For non-TCP traffic, QUIC is already the dominating part of the UDP share. A solution as realized with the Convert Protocol for (MP)TCP is not possible for QUIC as a QUIC connection cannot be intercepted and converted like it is done in the ATSSS architecture for (MP)TCP ({{fig-mptcp-arch}}). For (MP)TCP only the transport protocol (TCP) is intercepted, while transport security provided by Transport Layer Security (TLS) on top of TCP stays in tact. For QUIC transport, security is integrated into the transport protocol directly and should not be intercepted.


Some ATSSS modes can be natively supported by the base QUIC specification for QUIC flows. For example, the “Active-Standby” and “Smallest Delay” steering modes can be supported directly between an UE and a QUIC server without any assistance from the network other than the performance measurement information. 


Further, QUIC provides a feature called connection migration (Section 9 of {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}) that makes it possible to move a QUIC connection from one path/IP address to another without terminating and reestablishing the connection.
Connection migration can further enable traffic switching but does not support traffic splitting as only one path can be used simultaneously. 

An extension to QUIC to support simultaneous use of multiple paths is proposed in {{I-D.deconinck-quic-multipath}}.
However, similar as a native MPTCP connection, a (MP)QUIC connection initiated between the UE and a server without the ATSSS UPF assistance cannot benefit from any direct application of the ATSSS steering methods based on network input given that the steering policy as currently defined in ATSSS is local to the UE and the ATSSS UPF and there are no means to signal that policy to a remote server. 


Network input can be especially beneficial for cases such as:

- to avoid aggressive use of user quota if one of the access networks is subject to volume-based quota. 

- to avoid frequent connection migration if both access networks could be used to forward data (each with a distinct source IP address).

## QUIC as an ATSSS Data Plane Protocol 

This section elaborates how non-TCP traffic (UDP or a subset like QUIC) can to be encapsulated into a tunnel between the UE and the ATSSS UPF to enable so called ATSSS higher-layer steering for all traffic, not only TCP or QUIC. This section discusses to what extent QUIC can be used as a tunneling protocol for the ATSSS service and whether gaps are found.

When tunneling non-TCP (e.g., UDP, plain IP) over QUIC the Unreliable Datagram Extension
{{I-D.ietf-quic-datagram}} can be used. Each data packet would be transported unreliably as a datagram
over a QUIC connection. Transporting these datagrams unreliably as
in IPsec or DTLS-based tunnels is especially important for flows that do not require reliable delivery 
and suffer from unnecessary delay when reliability is added. QUIC datagrams are congestion-controlled, 
however, as the latency between the UE and the ATSSS UPF is small compared to the end-to-end latency,
having another local congestion control loops should not impact the end-to-end congestion control negatively.

This document discusses three approaches:

- Use of QUIC version 1 with the Unreliable Datagram Extension,
- Use of QUIC version 1 with the Unreliable Datagram Extension but with one QUIC connection over each access network, and
- Use of a single Multipath QUIC connection {{I-D.deconinck-quic-multipath}}, with the Unreliable Datagram Extension, over all access networks.



### Single QUICv1 Tunnel with Unreliable Datagram Extension and Connection Migration


QUIC can be used as a tunneling protocol between the UE and the ATSSS UPF. Use of the Unreliable 
Datagram Extension avoids unnecessary delays due to local retransmissions and, more important, subsequently 
head-of-line blocking.

In this case, there is (only) one QUIC connection between the UE and the ATSSS UPF for a given flow.
And as such, that QUIC connection uses only one access network at a time. 
However, given the connection migration capability of QUIC, the QUIC connection could be
moved over to another access network, e.g., when the network indicates that the currently used 
access network would go away or that its capacity becomes limited. The UE can then initiate 
the connection migration to start the path validation process as specified in Section 9 of {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}. When and how to decide to switch over depends on the ATSSS rules ({{sec-rules}}) and the performance measurement that are accessible to both the UE and the ATSSS UPF. Note that connection migration can only be at the initiative of the UE as per Section 9 of {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}. This means particularly that the UPF cannot make use of a second access network upon failure or degradation observed on a first access network.  

It is thus possible to support the switching and steering functions of ATSSS, 
but splitting cannot be supported. Path validation
induces a delay when switching as packets have to be buffered. Further congestion control state is
reset on a new path and needs to wrap up slowly. When frequent handovers happen, 
splitting traffic over multiple paths simulaneously can be beneficial for a smooth user experience.
Further, of course, the ability to use multiple paths simultaneously also increases the 
maximum capacity available, which can also be benefical in some cases.

This option is not a valid approach for the ATSSSv2 discussed within the 3GPP.

### Multiple QUICv1 Tunnels with Unreliable Datagram Extension and Connection Migration

Another approach is to use one QUIC connection over each access network.
In this case, there are multiple QUIC connections that are used as tunnels from the UE
to the ATSSS UPF to transport traffic that belongs to one or multiple flows. The UE and ATSSS
UPF need to select for each application data packet one tunnel QUIC connection to forward,
based on the ATSSS rules. 

This approach can support steering (by selecting just one connection for each flow), switching 
(by moving flows from one QUIC connection to the other) as well as splitting when both
tunnels are used simultaneously for different packets of the same flow. 

However, this approach for splitting is challenging
since data from the same flow are sent over different connections,
again using unreliable datagram to minimise head-of-line blocking.
Because both (tunnel) QUIC connections are completely independent of each other and the paths on the
different access networks may have different latency, this approach would
results in reordering of packets that belong to
a split flow. If reordering should be avoided, this would require additional signaling
between the UE and the ATSSS UPF, e.g., adding sequence numbers, and a reordering buffer and logic.

Furthermore, since the bandwidth
available for each QUIC session varies as a function of the congestion experienced
over each access network, data sent over a congested session could delay the
delivery of subsequent data over the other session. 

### MP-QUIC Tunneling

A third candidate solution is to leverage the ability of QUIC to support multiple
streams and the Unreliable Datagram Extension but extends it with
Multipath capabilities as described in {{I-D.deconinck-quic-multipath}}.

In this case, there is a single (Multipath) QUIC connection
between the UE and the ATSSS UPF. With a multipath extensions splitting is naturally supported.

Data sent over one access network can be retransmitted over the other if
the first becomes congested. Some measurements and simulations have
shown that Multipath QUIC provides similar performance as Multipath
TCP when combining different access networks {{MPQUIC-Conext}}.

Steering can be also supported similar as for MPTCP. The path scheduler can
map datagrams carrying an entire flows to one or another access network based on the
ATSSS rules. 

Switching can be improved by splitting traffic simulaneously over
both link first such that the congestion window of the new path can be open before
the old path goes aways. This makes handovers more smooth as experience with Multipath TCP on
smartphones has shown that handovers are not a binary process. When
a smartphone performs handovers, there are frequently short periods
of time during which both networks are imperfect {{MPTester}}. Using use both networks
simultaneously during these periods, improves the user experience.

Furthermore, traffic can be better distributed among available paths based on available resources 
if one of the access networks fails or becomes congested.


## Mapping of both TCP and Non-TCP to QUIC streams and datagrams

In ATSSSv1, each TCP connection originated by the UE corresponds to
one MPTCP connection that is terminated on the ATSSS UPF. With ATSSSv2
using MPQUIC as a tunneling protocol, one can leverage the multi-stream capability of QUIC to carry the bytestreams
of multiple TCP connections over a single MPQUIC session.

Focusing on the case where the UE maintains one QUIC connection with its
ATSSS UPF, every TCP connection that it creates results in the
creation of a new stream of the MPQUIC connection with the ATSSS UPF.
Similarly the ATSSS UPF can map each incoming TCP connection from a remote host 
onto a stream of the QUIC connection. This is illustrated in {{fig-atssv2-tcp}}.
Stream mapping is most beneficial for TCP, as it avoids reordering and TCP anyway requires
in-order delivery. Respectively it is usually more approriate to use QUIC datagram for all other
traffic.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
                                               AAAAAA
                                            ===========> +-------+
                                           //  +---------|Server2|
                                           ||  |         +-------+   
                QUIC session               \/  | 
 +---+--+ <------------------------------>+-----+        +-------+
 |  U E |  Stream1  AAAAAAAAAAAAA...AAA   |ATSSS|-/.../--|Server1|
 |      |  Stream2  BBBBBBBBBBBBB...BBB   | UPF |<======>+-------+
 +--+---+ ------------------------------- +-----+ BBBBBB
                                         

<----> MPQUIC session
<====> TCP connection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #fig-atssv2-tcp title="ATSSSv2 could map each TCP connection on a stream of the MPQUIC session between UE and ATSSS"}

Two application layer protocols are proposed to manage the mapping
of TCP connections to QUIC streams as well as the transmission of UDP
datagrams over QUIC datagrams. The to-be MASQUE working group extends the HTTP/3 CONNECT method
with a UDPCONNECT method to use QUIC as a tunnel for UDP traffic {{I-D.schinazi-masque-connect-udp}}.
Another use case in scope for the MASQUE group is IP proxying which can be used for tunneling and forwarding of TCP connections.
QUIC Tunnel is a close proposal providing similar
functionalities based on an binary protocol {{I-D.piraux-quic-tunnel}}{{I-D.piraux-quic-tunnel-tcp}}, and focusing on the ATSSS use case.

# Terms used in this document

Note for the authors - This is the list of terms used in the document as of 05-18, in the Master branch, in alphabetical order. It would be helpful for us to review them, to see (1) if there are multiple terms being used to describe the same thing, and (2) which of the filtered set of terms should have definitions in the Terminology section. 

It seems likely that we should group some of these related terms, rather than present an alphabetical list to the reader. 


3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP)

3GPP access network

5G control plane

5G Core (5GC)

Access Network

Access Traffic Steering

Access Traffic Switching

Access Traffic Splitting

Access Traffic Steering, Switching, and Splitting (ATSSS) service 

ATSSS Rules

ATSSS UPF

Active-Standby steering mode

BroadBand Forum (BBF)

Convert Protocol

Load-Balancing steering mode

MASQUE

MPTCP Client

MPTCP Proxy

Multi-Access (MA) IP address

Multi-access PDU (MA-PDU) Session

Multipath TCP (MPTCP)

Non-3GPP access network

Packet scheduler

Path manager 

PDU Connectivity Service

Performance Measurement Function (PMF) protocol

Protocol Data Unit (PDU) Session

Priority-Based steering mode

Smallest-Delay steering mode

Transport Converter

UDPCONNECT

Unreliable Datagram Extension

User Quota

Volume-based Quota

Wireless LAN (WLAN)

# Conclusion {#conclusion}

Based on the two above questions, it should be clear that MPQUIC could
cover both cases.

# IANA Considerations

(Note to RFC Editor - if this document ever reaches you, please remove this section)

This document makes no requests of IANA.

# Security Considerations

This section will be completed. 

# Acknowledgements

(Reviewers and commenters - your name goes here!)

# Document History

(Note to RFC Editor - if this document ever reaches you, please remove this section)

Version -00: initial submission
